# What is UML #

Models offer us a way to view the system from different angles. However, how exactly does one create a perfect model
that meets all our requirements? This scenario is where the Unified Modeling Language (UML) comes into the picture,
which is a standard way of visualizing a system’s design.

UML is not a programming language but is used to visualize a system’s behavior and structure. It is known for providing
tools to software engineers and developers that allow them to analyze, design, and develop software systems and model
processes. UML is the perfect language to explain the inner workings of the software system to all the stakeholders
involved—from an analyst to an author.

UML is composed of three main building blocks: things, relationships, and diagrams. These three exist at the center of
UML and play a key role in producing effective and easily understandable models.

# Key Terminologies #

**Class**: The notation represents the attributes and methods of an object.
**Object**: This notation refers to the instance of a class.
**Interface**: This notation represents the functionality without its implementation.
**Use case**: This notation describes the users’ goals and possible interactions with the system.
**Actor**: This notation represents the entities interacting with the system.
**Component**: This notation represents a section of the system.
**Node**: This notation is similar to the component notation, with the difference being that the node notation refers to
the physical aspect of a system, such as a server.
