# Object-oriented analysis #

Object-oriented analysis is the method where the system requirements are identified, which are then used to create a
model based on defining the roles of the objects present in the system and the tasks for which the system is
responsible. The analysis step excludes any implementation details. Rather, we identify different use cases here.

# Object-oriented design #

Object-oriented design is the phase where the implementation of the defined requirements and the models created during
the analysis phase begins. In this step, the models are further refined by adding additional constraints and making
decisions such as adding new elements to the given initial structure. At this stage, the designer also goes into the
inner details of the defined models and elaborates if any object-oriented principle is required. These models are
usually built using **Unified Modeling Language (UML)** diagrams such as class or sequence diagrams which will be
explained in detail in this chapter.

# Advantages of OOAD #

The object-oriented analysis and design process is highly well-known. The following are a few reasons why it is quite
renowned among the community:

- It’s extremely easy to understand, which helps in creating models of complex problems.
- Concepts such as inheritance help make the data reusable and scalable.
- It’s easily maintainable, which helps identify the issues in the early processes and saves time.

Let’s look at the Unified Modeling Language (UML) in the next lesson.
