# Primary Bottlenecks That Hurt the Scalability of our Application #

There are several points in a web application that can become a bottleneck and hurt the scalability of our application.
Let’s take a look at them.

# Database #

- Imagine we have an application that appears to be well architected. Everything looks good. The workload runs on
  multiple nodes, and it can scale horizontally. However, the database is a poor single monolith, where just one server
  has the onus of handling the data requests from all the server nodes of the workload.

- This scenario is a bottleneck. The server nodes work well, handle millions of requests at a point in time efficiently,
  yet, the response time of these requests and the latency of the application are abysmal due to the presence of a
  single database. There is only so much it can handle.

- Just like workload scalability, the database needs to be scaled well. Make wise use of database partitioning, sharding
  with multiple database servers to make your system efficient.

# Application design #

- A poorly designed application’s architecture can become a major bottleneck as a whole. A typical architectural mistake
  is not using asynchronous processes/modules wherever required; rather, all the processes are scheduled sequentially.

- For example, if a user uploads a document on the portal, tasks such as sending a confirmation email to the user,
  sending a notification to all subscribers/listeners to the upload event should be done asynchronously.

- Tasks like these should be forwarded to a messaging server or a task queue for asynchronous processing as opposed to
  being processed sequentially, making the user wait.

# Not using caching in the application wisely #

- Caching can be deployed at several layers of the application. It speeds up the response time by notches. A cache cuts
  down the overall load on the app, intercepting all the requests before they hit the origin servers.

- We should use caching exhaustively throughout the application to speed up things significantly. If the system has a
  lot of static data, caching can bring down the deployment costs significantly.

# Adding business logic to the database #

- No matter what justification anyone provides, I’ve never been a fan of adding business logic to the database.

- The database is just not the place to put business logic. Business logic in the database makes the application
  components tightly coupled. Imagine how much code refactoring this would require when migrating to a different
  database. Also, the testing gets complex.

# Not picking the right database #

- Picking the right database technology is vital for businesses. Need transactions and strong consistency? Pick a
  relational database. If you can do without strong consistency rather than need horizontal scalability, pick a NoSQL
  database.

- Trying to pull things off with a not-so-suitable tech always has a profound impact on the latency of the entire
  application in negative ways. More on this in the upcoming lessons.

# At the code level #

This shouldn’t come as a surprise, but inefficient and poorly written code has the potential to bring down the entire
service in production. This typically includes:

1. Using unnecessary loops or nested loops
2. Writing tightly coupled code
3. Not paying attention to the Big-O complexity while writing the code. (be ready to do a lot of firefighting in
   production)

Ideally, we should always do a DENTTAL (Documentation, Exception Handling, Null pointers, Time complexity, Test
coverage, Analysis of code complexity, Logging) check of our code when doing a dry run.

# Inefficient configuration and setup of load balancers #

Load balancers are the gateway to our application. Using too many or too few of them impacts the latency of our
application. More on load balancers in the upcoming lessons.