# How to Improve and Test the Scalability of our Application? #

Here are some of the standard strategies to fine-tune the performance of our web application. If the application is
performance-optimized, it can withstand more traffic load with less resource consumption than an application that is not
optimized for performance.
Now you might be wondering, **Why are you talking about performance when you should be talking about scalability? Isn’t
it what the lesson title says?**. Well, the application’s performance is directly proportional to scalability. If an
application is not performant, it will certainly not scale well.

These performance optimization strategies can be implemented even before the pre-production testing stage of the
application.

## Tuning the performance of the application – Enabling it to scale better ##

### 1. Caching ###

Cache wisely, and cache everywhere. Cache all the static content. Hit the database only when it is really required. Try
to serve all the read requests from the cache. Use a write-through cache.
Learn more about different caching strategy [here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/write-through-and-write-back-in-cache/)

### 2. Load Balancing ###

Avoid unnecessary round trips between the client and server. Try to club multiple requests into one.

### 3. Data compression ###

Compress data. Use appropriate compression algorithms to compress data and store data in compressed form. Since
compressed data consumes less bandwidth, the data download on the client will be faster.

### 4. CDN ###

Use a Content Delivery Network (CDN). Using a CDN further reduces the application’s latency due to the proximity of the
data from the requesting user.

### 5. Profiling ###

Profile the hell out of your app. Run application profiler and code profiler. See what processes are taking too long and
are eating up too many resources. Find out the bottlenecks. Get rid of them.

Profiling is the dynamic analysis of our code. It helps us measure the space and the time complexity of our code and
enables us to figure out issues like concurrency errors, memory errors and robustness and safety of the program. This
[Wikipedia resource](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_performance_analysis_tools) contains a good list of
performance analysis tools used in the industry.

---

## Testing the scalability of our application ##

- Once we are done with the essential performance testing of the application, it is time for capacity planning,
  provisioning the right amount of hardware—compute and storage power. The right approach for testing the application
  for scalability largely depends on the design of our system. There is no standard formula for this.

- Testing can be performed at both the hardware and the software level. Different services and components need to be
  tested—individually and collectively.

- During the scalability testing, different system parameters are taken into account, such as:
    1. CPU usage
    2. Network bandwidth consumption
    3. Throughput
    4. Number of requests processed within a stipulated time
    5. Latency
    6. Memory usage of the program
    7. End-user experience when the system is under heavy load and so on. In this testing phase, simulated traffic is
       routed to the system to study how the system behaves and scales under the heavy load. Contingencies are planned
       for unforeseen situations.

- As per the anticipated traffic, the appropriate hardware and computational power are provisioned to handle the traffic
  smoothly with some buffer.

- Several load and stress tests are run on the application. Tools like JMeter are pretty popular for running concurrent
  user tests on the application; if you are on the Java ecosystem. There are a lot of cloud-based testing tools
  available that help us simulate test scenarios just with a few mouse clicks.

- Businesses test for scalability all the time to get their systems ready to handle a traffic surge. If it’s a sports
  website, it prepares itself for the sports event day. If it’s an e-commerce website, it makes itself ready for
  festival season sale.
- In the industry, tech like Cadvisor, Prometheus and Grafana are pretty popular for tracking the system profile via
  web-based dashboards.

---
Few articles to read:

- [How HotStar Scaled With 10.3 Million Concurrent Users – An Architectural Insight](https://scaleyourapp.com/how-hotstar-scaled-with-10-3-million-concurrent-users-an-architectural-insight/)
- [Disney+ Hotstar Replaced Redis and Elasticsearch with ScyllaDB. Here’s Why.](https://scaleyourapp.com/state-of-backend-newsletter-issue-2/)
