# What is high availability? #

- High availability, also known as HA, is the ability of the system to stay online despite having failures at the
  infrastructural level in real-time.
  High availability ensures the service’s uptime is much more than usual. It improves the reliability of the system and
  ensures minimum downtime.

- The sole mission of highly available systems is to stay online and stay connected. A rudimentary real-world example of
  staying highly available is having backup generators to ensure continuous power supply in case of any power outages in
  hospitals, air traffic control towers and so on.

- In the industry, HA is often expressed as a percentage. For instance, when the system is 99.99999% highly available,
  it simply means 99.99999% of the total hosting time the service will be up. You might often see this in the Service
  Level Agreements (SLA) of cloud platforms.

## How important is high availability to online services? ##

- Social applications going down for a bit and then bouncing back might not impact businesses that much. However, there
  are mission-critical systems like aircraft systems, spacecrafts, mining machines, hospital servers, and finance
  stock-market systems that cannot afford to go down at any time. After all, lives depend on it.

- The smooth functioning of the mission-critical systems relies on continual connectivity with their network/servers.
  These are the instances that do not work without super highly available infrastructures.

- Besides, no service likes to go down, critical or not. To meet the high availability requirements, systems are
  designed to be fault-tolerant and their components are made redundant.